Boris Fritz's background is in nanotechnology,
including technologies that you might only read about
in science fiction.
But to understand this technology
requires a deep understanding of energy.
Boris's path to the understanding of subtle nuances
of energies goes back four decades,
when he began yoga and meditation.
This passion took him deep into the studies
of the Yugas, or great cycles of history.
Cycles that raise our consciousness as a species.
(Eastern flute music)
As people go through Sunday school,
in the Christian tradition for example,
and look at the notion of miracles,
a lot of it seems to be relegated to just that,
seemingly impossible events
that have taken place historically,
that maybe are myth in a lot of cases.
But what you're saying in your study of the Yugas,
and let's talk about that for a moment first,
the Yuga cycles that occur,
is that it's actually something based
quite matter-of-factly in reality.
So let's talk, please tell us about the Yugas,
and the cycles of learning, just briefly
before we get into some specifics.
Ok, the Yuga is basically, Yuga means cycle,
and we're talking about a 24,000 cycle,
based on the procession of the equinox.
And ancient civilizations, in fact,
some 30 ancient civilizations all agree
that the ages of man are related
to this 24,000 year cycle.
And what's interesting is that,
a lot of that information has been put together
by Giorgio de Santillana,
wrote a book,
and he was a professor
of history of science at MIT.
Mm-hmm, very prestigious.
And so, the book was called Hamlet's Mill.
And so, it's very recognized that someone like that,
of that stature, would talk about
these ancient civilizations all agreeing
on this kind of subject, so the idea is that
we should take this seriously
if all these ancient civilizations agreed
that this cycle was happening,
and that if affected how we evolved,
24,000 years, that is 12,000 years upward,
12,000 years downward.
And it's not like a cycle like this,
but it's really like a spiral because,
in ancient India, the history there,
they have retained much of this knowledge,
more than anywhere else.
And so the beauty of it is that--
To the very description--
They're really cycles within cycles,
and the only cycle that makes sense to us is a smaller one,
the 24,000 year cycle, where we can actually see things,
through history.
And also, interestingly, Plato speaks about these cycles,
that's how most people know about the Golden Age,
they've heard of the Silver, the Bronze, and the Iron Age,
that comes through Plato,
and that's equivalent to the cycles in India,
and all these other civilizations.
And Plato's writings
on the lost civilization, that is known as Atlantis now,
for example.
Right, he talk about Atlantis, and he also talks
about the ages and that Atlantis was happening
during the Golden Age.
And also, when he spoke with the priests,
the Egyptian priests where he got this knowledge,
the Egyptians told him, and I'll try to sort of quote it,
but the Egyptian priests told him
that you Greeks are like children,
you have completely forgotten the higher ages,
you don't know what it was like,
and how many cycles we've been through,
and that how we have to go again
through a lower cycle,
and begin all over again like children.
So they had that knowledge still,
and that's what you're going to get towards, I know,
with the Egyptians.
That's, yes, absolutely.
But, I should also mention a little bit
of what were some of these ages like,
and what did we see in them.
How are they characterized?
And as I mentioned in ancient Vedic texts,
or Indian texts, there's a lot of information
that they've retained, that make us understand
what all this means.
And one of the ones I like to talk about is,
the four illusions that cover the infinity of God,
that they speak about in Ancient India,
which refer to these four ages.
You have the four ages going up, the four ages going down.
So what happens in the Dark Age,
what is the most that you can attain in the Dark Age?
Well, I'm only talking about this one Vedic key,
in this instant, of those four ideas
that cover the infinity of God.
And they're illusions, and they're really the four ideas
that really give rise to creation, give rise to duality.
And they're basically the atom,
space, time, and vibration.
And out of that, all creation comes.
Yes, mm-hmm.
And any one of those interrelates with the others,
but, in terms of understanding the four ages,
the idea is that in the Iron Age,
you have what's called on with the atom,
but what it means is, solidity.
The material existence, that people are only aware
of their bodies and not aware of the inner forces
that come in the higher ages.
So the most that people can do in the Iron Age,
is understand architecture
and mechanistic kind of things.
Like they can have fairly complex mechanistic processes,
but that's it.
At this point would you go ahead
and put that in context to where we are
at this cycle in history?
Right, the downgoing Dark Age
from 700 BC, down to 500 AD,
and 500 AD was the rock bottom
of that whole 24,000 year cycle.
And then we started to go in the ascending Dark Age,
from 500 to about 1600.
There's a transition there, 15 to 1600,
where a lot of things started happening--
Renaissance, yeah.
A lot of energy, and Columbus discovering America,
and Magellan going around the globe
21 years after that.
You have the Renaissance, you have science,
all these things starting to happen,
along with the transition into the Bronze Age
there from 17 to 1900.
And then once you hit 1900, you're really in the Bronze Age
of this concept.
And what are the characteristics
of the Bronze Age?
Right, and that is where we go from
the materialistic aspect, we go to space.
I mentioned space as being the second one,
and what that means is, first of all,
we begin to realize, that the solidity of this world,
is a illusion, that really it's mostly space.
The atom, once we begin to see it,
is almost nothing but space,
and what there is of solidity, really,
like my hand going through this,
it doesn't go through this chair, not because of solidity,
but because of electromagnetic vibration.
You know, the electrons are interacting,
they're repelling each other, and so there is no solidity.
So we're in the state of space, and not only that,
but what it means is that,
in terms of the Vedic seer and things,
the way we understand things,
is that space also refers to the idea that,
in terms of distance, overcoming distance,
and so the telegraph, then we have the telephone,
finally we can see far away with the television--
Hubble.
And then we have space travel,
and what happens next is, by the end of this age,
supposedly, according to this plan,
we will reach the stars.
So that's what's going to happen in this age,
and then we progress to the next age, the silver age,
and in that age, we conquer time.
So that's very hard for us to understand,
but that's also the age, according to this whole way
that the ancient Indian seers see it,
is also the age of telepathy,
the age of communicating directly with each other
on a deeper level, where we go beyond mind.
And that's really the age of wizards and sorcerers,
as you could see it.
And then from there, you go to the highest age,
which is the Golden Age, where people
have direct experience of God
and they understand vibration as the om,
as it's called, in this case,
but they understand the whole creation of God.
And now, there's also levels beyond that,
in terms of the yogic view, that reflects all of this,
and I have no time to get into that.
But then when we go back to the understanding
in the Silver Age,
the depth of understanding between people,
and the incredible mental powers,
and as I said, people like wizards, you know.
We go from there, the Egyptians retained
much of that understanding.
Yes, and I'm going to just
inject one little thing here,
and then just keep you on that same track,
'cause we're getting now where we wanna start
going into the meat of it, and that is,
the interesting thing is, as we are as a people now,
because our vision has become very physical,
and very linear, we think of the Bronze Age, for example,
most people will hear this and think, ah, the past,
only the past.
It's not well understood, certainly in Western tradition,
this is a wheel or a circle, as you say.
A cycle, cyclical nature of evolution
and devolution, as it were.
So the Bronze Age was, and the Bronze Age is again,
and you're saying now, we are in that circular part
of the wheel and the coming up of the Bronze Age,
rather than the passing down through the Bronze Age.
And my question in this is,
and before we launch into these other
modalities of being back then,
when you're coming out of this materialistic or Iron Age,
does there become a fear of immortality
because you recognize nothing but the physical world?
A fear or mortality, I should say.
Because it seems that that's, we have a major crisis
going on as a species, and our fear of our own mortality.
And clinging to the physical world
to validate that we are.
We shop, therefore we are, you know?
What's going on with that portion
of where we are right now,
and then we're gonna pop back.
Yeah, well what happens right now is that,
since we are rising out of the Dark Age,
which is the age of slavery to the senses,
that's also why you have slavery ending,
in terms of an institution.
Like, in 1832 you have the American colonies
and the English colonies stopping slavery,
you have the 23 million serfs freed in 1861,
in Russia, and Lincoln freeing the slaves.
And you know, then in 1910,
China bans slavery.
So there are different levels of understanding this,
but we are going into this age of energy,
that's another part of the Vedic keys,
it's our time, the time to cover,
but you go from sloth, from tamas,
to rajas, which is energy.
So you have this huge influx of energy coming in
in our age, and the problem is,
we're still holding onto these dogmatic,
fundamentalist, simplistic ideas
of the Dark Age, and we don't want to let go,
but all this energy's coming in.
So it's like stirring up mud, and you can't see clearly
because you're in this sense of mudness,
and so people, like they drink coffee,
when they can't feel the energy,
they're trying to live in this energy world,
that's just driving them crazy,
because they can't adapt to this higher frequency,
'cause we're still holding onto these other things.
So people can get very violent,
because they want things the way they used to be.
Kinda quietly live on the way we were going.
You know, it's good enough for me,
and I don't want anything new,
and let me go, you know?
And you can see a lot of that in fundamentalist Islam,
unfortunately, whereas there are other,
wonderful people in Islam as well, the Sufis.
It's all forms of fundamentalism, really.
So it's happening all over the world--
Yes.
And so people feel this threat,
because their status quo is no longer acceptable.
Just like Marxism is materialistic,
atheism.
And that kind of idea doesn't work anymore.
Because people now are looking to interconnect
with the universe, they're not just this
little existentialist self that's completely on its own.
We are now interconnecting, and that's the other thing,
is 18 million people in the US alone today
are practicing some form of yoga or meditation
on a regular basis.
When I started with yoga over 40 years ago,
I was a loner.
Hardly anyone understood that.
In just 40 years, you can see the transformation,
and in the higher ages, everyone meditates.
Because we interconnect with nature,
with our environment, on a deeper spiritual level.
And therefore, it's no longer the good and evil
kind of focus, it's really more a focus on,
nature, and on our inner communion with God,
and we want a personal experience of God,
rather than just to be told to believe this, or that,
in a dogmatic way.
So that pretty much explains where we are
right now and what's pushing our buttons
and why the fear.
Right.
And so, let's go back now.
Before you were talking about the higher ages,
the ages that we assign to the, the ages of wizards,
for example.
And let's go into Biblical texts that we know of
and some of those examples, and what you're saying
was actually going on there.
Right.
At that time, the best way to see some of that,
is when you go to some of the Indian scriptures,
and also go to the Old Testament.
And in one case,
in the old Indian scriptures,
they talk about people who had all these powers
that are internalized.
Like right now, we're developing technology,
in the Bronze Age and eventually
there's going to be an inner technology
in the next Silver Age.
And that kind of technology is the powers
of the soul that we unleash from meditation.
And the same thing in the previous Silver Age,
that ended around 3100 BC.
It lasted 3600 years, so it's somewhere
around 7000 to 3100 BC.
And in that Silver Age,
people had tremendous mental powers,
they had tremendous depth of understanding,
and meditation, but there are always bad people
in every age, you know, so there were different--
And always brilliant,
wonderful people in every age.
Right, yeah, and so, but more good people,
as you go higher.
And so in this case,
the Indian scriptures talk about,
back in the Ramayana, ancient Hindu epic,
talk about how the guru of Rama,
the hero of the epic,
he gives them these four powers,
to overcome his enemies.
And what they are, he actually internalizes
these type of potent entities into his inner being,
and these become weapons to be used.
And so these are, like you would think of wizards.
Right, almost like psychic weaponry.
Right, they're very potent at something
we don't really understand at all.
And, now when you come down into the last Bronze Age,
and you look at Moses and Aaron,
Moses was raised by Pharaoh like a stepson,
and he was trained by the Egyptian priests
in all this higher knowledge that they had kept
from the Silver Age.
So they were some of the last people
that could still do this kind of magic,
which seems strange to us now.
Of course, anyone right now, if we showed people
our cell phones and that we can talk anywhere,
to people around the world,
so 100, 200 years ago, it'd be magic to them.
So anyway--
But to part the sea, for example.
Right, and so,
when Moses met with Pharaoh
to let the Israelites go,
and Pharaoh didn't want that to happen,
Moses had to struggle with the priests there,
with the Egyptian priests, and one of the things a staff,
like we know about magic wands,
well his staff, he threw it down and it turned into a snake.
And then the Egyptian priests turned their staffs
into snakes, and they battled,
and of course Moses being a realized soul,
won that encounter.
And then some of the other things
where he used his wand to turn the Nile River
into blood, these are all things that,
they actually had those kind of powers
in those days, and we tend to think,
oh this is just maybe stories--
These are just metaphors or so, yes.
But we forget that things were different
in different time zones, and we begin to see
that happening right now, when we see
the incredible advance of technology
in the last hundred years.
So, again what people thought,
that we think is normal, is like magic to people
a couple hundred years ago,
and what's it going to be like very soon?
How do you see this,
in terms of the very personal human element of it?
In every age you have the brilliant ones,
in every age you have those who are,
perhaps have lower intentions rather than higher intentions.
And where we sit now, it almost seems as though,
we're sitting on the verge of understanding things
that may not have normally been available,
except in Silver or Golden ages,
but many people seem to be going beyond our age,
and beyond, and cross lines of consciousness.
How do you see this whole phenomena,
of our human expansion, right now?
That's really--
Even though we're in a lower part of--
The perfect question, because--
Yes.
What's happening is that in every age,
there come people, spiritual guides,
that in a sense God sends to us,
that will bring us to the next age,
so that now that we are in the Bronze Age,
the religion for this age,
has to be to bring us to the Silver Age.
And so we are being given those type of,
messages, for instance,
what this conference was about,
on ancient knowledge,
and especially on the Yugas,
all comes from Swami Yukteswar,
who first really clarified and talked about it,
and he was the guru of Paramahansa Yogananda,
who wrote Autobiography of a Yogi.
And now, he knew what was going on
in terms of the ages, and that's one of the reasons why
he sent Paramahansa Yogananda to the west
and to the world, to bring again the science
of Kriya Yoga, which was a method or a technique
that was used in the higher ages.
I found it in some of the old Taoist texts,
I found it in Tibetan Buddhism.
What's the hallmark of that practice?
That technique really has to do with
circulating the light, in the spine and brain,
to open up the channel to God,
so you can have a direct experience of God.
And when that, the reason that technique is being taught,
is to bring us to the next age.
He also gave the energization exercises,
which, in a way is like recharging a battery,
and it acclimatizes us to the energy of this age.
So he gave us something for this age,
with the energization exercises.
They're a form of, almost like Tai Chi,
and they last about 15 minutes, you do them twice a day.
But they bring your whole body into attunement,
through tension relaxation,
and working with the prana, with the energy.
And that's the thing, as I mentioned before,
people are going crazy with this energy
that's come into the world, how do you handle it?
And this is one way you do that.
And what is the name
of that particular practice?
That would be the recharging exercises,
or energizing exercises.
Ok.
And that's all part of self-realization fellowship,
they have the lessons that take you
three and a half years through all these different things.
And there are many paths that all take you
to this next level.
And the beauty of it is now that we've gone
from the Dark Age of dogma and literal interpretation
of scriptures, we're to the point where
people are no longer happy with being told
what to believe, they want the personal experience of God.
And so, now everyone is looking
to practice these kind of things,
to take them to the next level.
And technology, even,
is being developed to be able to incorporate
a connection between our minds, and light,
and color, and sound, and helping bring about
the remembrance of those vibratory frequencies,
and the path to enlightenment.
So we have hard core people in the world
of engineering and physics that are even grounding this
into literal physical technologies,
as well as, you say, practices being remembered again.
How do you see this playing itself out,
for those who are, well,
let's talk about those who are on the leading edge,
who are already now starting to usher
our way into the Silver Age.
Just what you were saying.
Well, a lot of it begins with physics,
going into quantum physics,
going to the holographic kind of approach.
And then medicine had to follow,
so now you have energy and medicine starting up,
and now for the first time also,
you have people recognizing acupuncture again,
which is energy medicine from the higher ages,
that was preserved.
And also Tai Chi, people weren't practicing Tai Chi
except in China, but now you see them practicing
in parks all over.
So, this sort of approach is coming,
but what we see more and more, in terms of science,
is the interplay of pranic energies, or chi,
with electricity, magnetism, the forces of creation.
And so we come to a deeper understanding,
and we also begin to be able to do things
that gradually advance us, and that also enhance things.
Like I would think that the staff, or magic wand
of a magician in the Silver Age, you know,
probably has some sort of science behind it,
of focusing the energy through that wand.
So it's said, yes.
Those sort of things, but of course,
on a deeper level the wand represents the spine,
and the chakras, and the spine and all the powers there.
So depending on what level is the intention
of what you're reading in the scriptures.
But as we go on,
we get from the Bronze to the Silver Age,
which is like, we've got 2000 years to go in the Bronze Age.
And at that point, more and more we get
to the energy control,
as opposed to technology.
Technology will begin to become less and less,
and mental control,
the control of the powers of the soul will come out,
and then be more primary in the Silver Age,
but there'll be a combination.
And gradually when you get to the Golden Age,
people have everything they need from the power of the soul,
so they can live very simply, live in nature.
If you have everything, if you don't need clothes,
if you don't, if you have complete control,
all this technology becomes unnecessary.
And so sometimes, you know, we judge people,
oh, they're primitive, 'cause they don't have technology.
Well, if they have this deeper state,
then they're way beyond technology.
But there's a difference.
You know, a big difference.
You can think of just a primitive person living,
a hunting gathering culture, but actually those people,
they have their shamans and things
who are very advanced themselves.
So it's hard to make judgements.
But the point is, once you have gone through these stages
and reached that highest stage,
then people actually are able to live in complete harmony
with everything around them.
And that's what we're striving,
even if we don't know it, that is what we're
internally seeking, that's why we've become restless,
and we've become distrustful
of all the systems, the religions,
the politicians, and so forth.
This is a very natural type of backlash
in order to force our birth into the new way.
And it's interesting what you just talked about,
because oftentimes when people are saying,
well if there were such advanced civilizations,
why don't we find those artifacts?
But as you say, in the most advanced civilizations,
the artifacts are less necessary.
Yeah we're in a transition now,
because it's only during this shorter transition
of a few hundred years of the Industrial Revolution,
that you have all this waste.
Yes, that's the problem.
Now to give you an idea of what's happening,
one of my friends, 'cause I'm active
in the field of nanotechnology,
and one of the pioneers,
formerly a professor at Rutgers University, Josh Hall,
wrote the book Nanofutures.
And he told me about his idea
of what's coming next, and we call them foglets.
And this idea is if you imagine a television screen,
you see the pixels, they're so fine, they're so small,
that you get a perfect picture,
you don't know there are pixels.
Now imagine these pixels being even 1/10,
or 1/100 of that size, so that it's really perfect,
but they're not two-dimensional pixels,
they're voxels, they're three-dimensional.
And we're going to call them foglets.
And these little foglets have eight little arms
that come out of them that hook together
with other foglets.
And they are pre-programmed for different strength,
so if they're on your floor, in the future,
in 50, 100 years from now,
that's going to be one of the technologies we're seeing.
Now when they're on your floor,
they can have the consistency of a soft carpet,
or they have can have a consistency of a hardwood floor.
Or anything, it could be like a metal floor,
depending on what you program it to be.
But now, let's say in your house, you wake up,
now your bed is made of foglets.
So you say, oh, ok, it's daytime,
I want my room to be my living room now.
So all of a sudden the foglets in your bed dissolve,
and re-form as a couch, chair, table,
whatever you want and you have programmed
for your living room.
And what is the mechanism
for the programming?
The program, I mean software,
that runs it, and that all the foglets,
they have tiny, brain in there that corresponds.
They only have to follow the program,
they don't have to contain the program themselves.
Whereas in the Golden Age,
it would be pure intention.
Right, it would be pure intention.
Yes.
But now, when these things form like that,
let's say a friend of yours calls you, from Brazil.
And immediately, if you want to pretend
that you're in his place, then automatically,
your whole room will re-form, all the foglets will re-form,
to his furniture in his room, and look like his room.
And he will form out of foglets,
and so you can go up, shake his hand,
his hand will be soft like a real hand,
and you can talk to him, you can sit down on his couch,
even though you're still in your living room.
But the amazing thing is, this isn't virtual reality,
because it's not, you're not some kind of headset
that's pretending in a virtual world,
this is in the real world.
You're actually sitting on this couch,
which is conforming to your friend's couch in Brazil.
So it's like a holographic reality
but with density to it.
Yeah, exactly.
And you're saying this is--
So even the person feels real to you.
And so you wonder what's real, what's not real.
But now my real point is, once you're done with this,
everything can dissolve back down,
and your house can dissolve.
You go on vacation, you can dissolve your house,
say, and have a nice little park there.
And when you come back, you pick a program
of what house you want, and it re-forms.
How far down the pipe do you see this being,
this technology being utilized?
How far along are you?
We're going to see some of this
in the next 20, 30 years, small versions of it,
and gradually, like what you'll see is like,
when you're walking through your house,
your television screen will follow you along the walls,
as pixels or holograms or foglets,
and it keeps going, more complex.
Like the other thing that's going to happen,
is you're going to have the nanosuit,
the nanotechnology suit, which is only like a micron thick,
and so it's so thin that you don't even know
you're wearing it, it's completely invisible to you,
but it has all this machinery,
that completely controls the temperature.
So you can be in the Arctic, walking, what seems like naked,
and never feel the cold.
You can be in the Sahara desert, won't bother you.
Then you'll have the equivalent of conversion
of water into oxygen, for you,
so you can just walk into the ocean, under the ocean,
and you don't need a suit.
And all this kind of thing is on its way,
we know some of the basic technology.
So what happens in the higher ages?
There won't be any waste.
Everything just, when it's used, will reform
into whatever else you want.
So in that sense we're lucky we have the Pyramids left to us
as something we can see from higher ages.
And of course these people were aware of the lower ages,
so they left us things.
But primarily are things that we can't hurt ourselves with.
Right, exactly.
Yeah.
And final thoughts on this?
This is absolutely fascinating, and it makes
the notion of our evolution not frightening at all,
but very inviting.
That's true.
Because I think a lot of people are,
obviously a lot of people are frightened right now,
and need a hand extended out,
to move in the next direction.
Yeah.
Well, what's happening, too, is right now is we're,
even though we've entered the Bronze Age in this cycle,
and things are going to look a lot better,
one of the problems is that,
there's, as I said, cycles within cycles,
so if you look at a mini cycle,
a subcycle of this Bronze Age,
we're in the Dark Age portion, which is only 100 years.
But we still have this century,
to kind of get out of all this problem that we're seeing,
all this mixed up mud, that's churning with all this energy.
So, even though we may feel like things are terrible
right now, when you look at the overall picture
and you understand, look at,
just what's happened with technology,
the depth, understanding of man,
how it has changed to be able to comprehend
quantum mechanics and all these kind of things
in the last 100 years.
That this is going to keep going,
this is not going to change.
The time wasn't right before though,
because people tried doing things like printing presses,
in China and even in Europe in the 12th century,
but it wasn't time yet, the transition period hadn't come.
So everything has its proper time.
And so, we are going to see changes,
and I know with 2012, people are worried,
and again there, I mean that's an alignment
with the center of the galaxy,
and I don't know what kind of implications it has,
but we are going to see changes,
and things have to work themselves out,
but we're going to be out of that.
It's safe to say it, for me right now,
within the end of this century, 'cause I won't be around.
(laughter)
But, anyway, that's sort of how things are looking.
That's still good news.
Good news for humanity.
Things are definitely positive for the future,
but we may have some hiccups in the immediate future.
Very true.
Thank you so much for your time,
and I'm glad, because we met last year,
and I'm so glad we finally got to catch you this year.
I know, yeah, it's wonderful.
It's a pleasure, thank you Boris.
Thank you.
For those of you interested in these great cycles
of consciousness, you will likely also enjoy our interviews
with John Major Jenkins, Walter Cruttenden,
and John Anthony West.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.